**Kandhamal Diaries- To be more appropriate was getting lost in G. Udaygiri**

My tryst with the social sector began way back in 2016. Internshala had just launched few years ago. I was disappointed on getting into Ravenshaw. I thought it would be somewhat like a typical government college. No classes, no teachers or exam on time. So what do you do? You do internships to build up your CV. And then you apply abroad and get into the prestigious universities to do your PhD. But again that did not happen. 

I tried emailing every sociology department on the already present details in their website. Most of them graciously responded back to my queries. Now I understand how much of Shitposting kind of things happens in the email too. If there was something, I would like to apologize to these for wasting their time in my silly queries. I tried everything that was available to me. Met and attended orientation and people. All of this was in attempt to make it abroad. For a time being I was fascinate d by the journey of Sura P. Rath and Ananta Kumar Giri. I tried to understand him, but could not comprehend most of the things written in the books. 

These things aside, I had realized that internships are the path to a successful careers whatever path I chose. So by some stroke of luck I got internship at the Kalinga Kusum foundation. It was unpaid one. Being in the office kind of environment was ecstatic for me. I got know people who were much senior to me. The did not pressurize me for me work. Whatever little task was given, I completed it. I enjoyed travelling from Cuttack to Bhubaneshwar. This travel meant some kind of Independence for me. 

I had zero idea about startups at that time. But in my attitude and other things, in the way I approached work, I was intended to disrupt the entire sectors. Priya didi tried to tame my energy and enthusiasm so that I was not running after the wrong things. At that time, I was crystal clear that I wanted to be an academic. 

A small detour for the other things. Why do the American colleges have something like a statement of purpose or personal essay statements? In India the IITs just have an exam. You have to clear and that is how you are ranked, and that’s how you get into the annals of the most prestigious institutions of India. That also has something to do with the nature of the economy, and overall culture around the things in India.  In India , even in the present date getting job is difficult. The Maslow’s hierarchy of needs are restricted to the things in the lower level. Getting a job and making ends meet suffices that. The American way of college had something more to them. They assume that the basic subsistence stuff have been figured out. Now if you are on to something, it must have something bigger purpose in life. So a good college application is necessary to make sure that you get into a good college. 

Getting things to the point. UPSC was the thing I got interested in. Not because of any perks or something of that sort. It was more because of the generalist sense and escaping from what I had to do. Because I did not have to take the stress of finding something to do in every few years. The civil service offered you means to do the same things. The jobs were very stable. You hardly got fired. You could see the impact of the work that you did. On the top of this I wanted to be a diplomat. Because you get to live in different countries every few years. But again UPSC is kind of winner take it all approach to things. The 700-1000 people selected are the winners of the process. For the rest of them, they become unknown nameless people who appeared for an exam. The probabilities of getting into the civil service are stacked against you. It is a sheer number game. And you cannot put a pistol to someone’s head to make him/her study. Same goes for me. 

These things aside. UPSC did not work out for me. I decided to take a plunge into the world of  looking for the jobs. But even the job market, in the social sector was difficult to crack. I kept interviewing and cold emailing people. Sometimes I got some responses. But most of the times these things led to a dead end. Indus Action was interviewing me for a position at their Chhatisgarh office. But then one day, out of blue I got a text from Uttam. 

Someone whom he knew wanted to hire an Odia speaking researcher. I was unemployed. Anything for me was better than just sitting at home and doing nothing. So I kind of said “Yes” to it without the slightest idea of what I was getting into. In that case I had made my peace with the worst possible outcome. I was ready to be underpaid, and bad working conditions. Later I realized it was the organisation where I intended to work for a long time. I had tried to apply there. But again some kind of laziness and procrastination took over. So I did not apply. So this manifestation thing took over. I realized that I have come to do an RCT. I was naive during my interview with Oxford Policy Management. But now it was something else. 

So I had a lot of apprehensions. How would be colleagues? What if I make mistake in conducting the interviews? How collaborative and co-operative are my teammates? How is Kandhamal to me in general? I had all of these doubts. What was the best way of clearing them? It was to jump into the opportunity that I got in the first place. 

This was the first time I was not feeling scared of  leaving home. Of course by now I have been quite familiar with leaving home to get somewhere. And it was again in the familiar place. The unfamiliar part of Kandhamal was hedged through money and good facilities. Not many can afford to stay in hotel with the rent of Rs. 1500 per day for 5 days straight. Not many can afford a chauffeur driven car to take them around. Generally I would have hated spending so much of money for a car. Firstly the car was paid for . Secondly having some amount of prosperity afforded you to utilize your time better. You can go to more places, and make more optimum use of time. Maybe that is the reason people use cab to get from one place to another. But again if you think it caused pollution and global warming. But you are generating employment for the people who is driving you around in the car. 

So I waited for my bus at the Palbani Bypass. Maybe this for a shorter duration. So I did not feel the loneliness. This was not the time to feel lonely. This was the time to get pieces together and work towards something. And again this was all of the familiar stuff that played along. Maybe staring at the city through glass window somewhat reduces the uncertainty that a city brings along for you. I have been through the same places in auto-rickshaw. It is a different feeling there. Money and some amount of privilege reduce the uncertainty that came with travelling to a new place. 

Our driver Mr. Pradeep was a professional man. He called me up at different points of travel to get a sense of my arrival time. He was somewhat in his mid to late thirties. I was expecting him to be in his early thirties. But anyways he was a mild mannered person. And being with persons like that puts me in awkward places. I was even hesitant to sit in the front seat of the car. And breaking ice with Sunetra also seemed challenging. But again the ice broke easier because of a lot of common things we shared. Our links with Calcutta, studying social sciences and Hyderabad. She is probably a year younger to me. She was worked for a year in the social sector. And she was too running the race of being part of the gig economy. No doubt, our jobs were one of the most well remunerated ones in country. But again they were for the shorter time frame. Hers extended for a longer time- almost six months. Mine was a short duration one for 2 months. The conversations of the difficult job market came up frequently in our conversations.

We stopped at a restaurant on the way to have lunch. After lunch, it was waiting in the driving car to reach Phulbani. We were dozing off then and now. I was amazed at how Mr. Pradeep could keep driving the car without getting sleepy. They say that sleep is infectious. When someone in a room yawns, the rest of the persons in the room do the same. But Mr. Pradeep kept on driving the car smoothly through uphills and downhills.

Eastern ghats emerged from time to time. We went uphill and downhill. Tree lined roads. Lights filtering through the gaps onto the road. Dense overgrowth of vegetation with houses nestled in between. All of these things made it an ideal place to vacation. The surroundings looked more beautiful because I was watching the things pass by from my own cocoon. Clean air-conditioned car zipping past through the things on the road. We saw upturned truck on the way of our journey. The truck remained the same in the return journey too. 

We reached Phulbani at around 5:30 pm. I got a room which had a mountain views. On the mornings sunlight filtered through the various kinds of patterns in the cloud. I loved the way through which I could observe things outside in the black tinted windows. It was something like the other person in the outside were unaware of my presence. I kept a close tab on the things happening on the ground. 

Phulbani as a town seemed to be a normal sense of small towns in the liberalization era. The hotel was somewhere in the outskirts of the town. Of course the main market was located at a walking distance. But we did not care to explore the place. The main street resembled somewhat a busy junction lined with shops selling clothes, electronic goods and jwellery. There were shops selling 'tel-bhaji' too. This was a busy junction with bus stands and bus stops. I guess because of lack of activity and difficult terrain this place did not have rail connectivity. (Of course all of these are late observations). I did not observe these things on the first day itself. 
